After the appearance of the potential climax there will be a reaction, visually represented by a major movement in the opposite direction, ultimately confirming the appearance of the climax event. In accumulation structures this is called an Automatic Rally (AR), while in distribution structures it is labeled an Automatic Reaction (AR). This ChoCh (Change of Character) has major implications because it signals a change in the market context; the ChoCh emerges to end the previous trend and start a sideways price movement. This change of character must be confirmed by the last event of Phase A: the Secondary Test. Once this appears we can then expect the market to move into a new environment from that moment on. The implications of its development As the structure develops, the distance that this movement travels will be one of the elements that we must take into account in order to determine what the big players are doing. We must bear in mind that a short-distance reaction does not have the same implications as a significantly longer one (in comparative terms). For example, in a market in which the last bullish movements have developed with an average of 50 points; and suddenly a 100-point Automatic Rally is observed, this suggests a greater underlying strength. When we see a potential reaction that is constantly fluctuating, hasn’t traveled a great distance and has no significant volume, this denotes that there is no great intent to push prices towards that side and suggests that the market is not yet in a state of equilibrium. If this happens after a potential Selling Climax, it shows us that there is not a great deal of interest in pushing up the price. The control of the market still remains in the hands of bearish traders. With this apparent weakness, the most sensible thing is to expect a redistribution process that results in lower prices. Something that would add strength to this scenario would be to see a Secondary Test that ends below the potential Selling Climax. The same occurs for analyses that indicate a higher probability of a distribution pattern developing. If we see that the bearish reaction movement (Automatic Reaction) is zigzagging up and down, hasn’t traveled a great distance, with no peak volume observed and that on top of that the Secondary Test ends above the high established by the Buying Climax, this strongly suggests the appearance of a re-accumulation structure. The anatomy of the reaction Generally, the volume at the beginning of the movement will be large; it is the end of a climax event and usually this price reversal takes place with climatic volume (with the exception of the appearance of a Selling/Buying Exhaustion event). As the movement progresses, the volume will decrease until it is relatively low at the end. This diminishing volume suggests a lack of interest in continuing in that direction and will put an end to the reaction. Practically the same thing happens with the price ranges. At the beginning of the movement the ranges will be wide, with good trend candlesticks/bars that will progressively narrow as they approach the end of said event.
Through continued practice you will develop the judgment necessary to know when the narrowing of the ranges and the decrease in volume have reached a point where the movement is likely to stop. There are no fixed or mechanical rules, it is simply a matter of experience. Uses of the reaction It delimits the boundaries of the structure This is one of the most important elements of the structures described by the Wyckoff Method, since it marks one of the limits of the structure. ​​The Automatic Rally establishes the upper limit of the range, delimiting a clear resistance zone where new selling activity can be expected to occur on subsequent visits. ​​The Automatic Reaction establishes the lower limit of the range, delimiting a clear support zone where new buying activity can be expected to occur on subsequent visits. It identifies the climax event The reaction is hugely significant because at times it will not be very clear when the genuine climax has appeared. As a result, we can use the change of character that comes after this reaction to identify the climax event. ​​The Automatic Rally will help identify the genuine Selling Climax. ​​The Automatic Reaction will help identify the genuine Buying Climax. It provides us with the market context If we have correctly identified the climax and the reaction, the market’s change of character is underway and we know that the price will test this climax action through a Secondary Test. This gives us our road map. This is very important since it provides us with the context and what we can expect the market to do. This can even help us in terms of our trading approach: ​​If you have previously correctly identified the Selling Climax and now the Automatic Rally, you can move down to a shorter time frame to look for the development of a minor distribution structure that generates the end of the Automatic Rally and the bearish reversal that the development of the Secondary Test is looking for. ​​If you have previously identified the genuine Buying Climax and now the Automatic Reaction, you can move down to a shorter time frame to look for the development of a minor accumulation structure that generates the end of the Automatic Reaction and the bullish reversal that the development of the Secondary Test is looking for. Opportunity to take profits If in an act of recklessness you were to trade on a climax event looking for precisely that rebound, you shouldn’t hold the position for the entire development of the range, because initially you won’t know where the structure is one of reversal or continuity. The sensible thing to do would be to close the position at the Automatic Rally/Reaction for a small profit.
The Automatic Rally is a bullish price movement that develops after the end of the Selling Climax and appears as the first sign of buyer interest. Part of Phase A, this is an event which stops the previous downtrend and takes place after the Preliminary Support and the Selling Climax. Why the Automatic Rally occurs During the downtrend the price will have moved down a considerable distance and will possibly reach an oversold condition during the development of the Selling Climax, where the following actions take place: ​​Exhaustion of the supply. Aggressive sellers are no longer entering the market. ​​Short covering. Sellers who entered higher up close their positions. ​​Appearance of demand. New buyers enter after observing the climax event. The market has reached levels that no longer interest sellers, which will cause a lack of supply. The withdrawal of sellers, both those who have stopped selling aggressively, and those who have taken profits from their short positions; coupled with the appearance of new buyers, who may have entered with mean reversion strategies, will cause the price to drive upwards with ease. In this case, buyers who have entered at the Selling Climax usually do not intend to hold their positions because they are almost certainly looking for short-term trades and will take profits during the Automatic Rally, putting an end to its development.  Automatic Reaction ￼ The Automatic Reaction is a significant bearish price movement that appears as the first sign of seller interest. It is part of Phase A which stops the previous uptrend and develops after the Preliminary Supply and the Buying Climax. Why the Automatic Reaction occurs The market will have moved up enough to produce a series of events that together give rise to the development of the Automatic Reaction: ​​Exhaustion of the demand. There are no aggressive buyers left who are willing to keep buying. ​​Long covering. Buyers who entered lower down close their positions, taking profits. ​​Appearance of the supply. New sellers enter after observing the previous climax event. The previous market rally may have reached an overbought condition leading to a lack of demand. The withdrawal of buyers, both those who have stopped buying aggressively, and those who have taken profits from their long positions, coupled with the appearance of new sellers, will cause the price to drive downwards with ease. Sellers who have entered at the Buying Climax are probably speculating, looking for a quick downward move and will take profits during the Automatic Reaction, which will put an end to its development.

